---
layout: post
title: The Ordeal of Obtaining an Apple Developer Professional Account
author:
  login: julien
  email: julien.lemoine@algolia.com
  display_name: julien
  first_name: Julien
  last_name: Lemoine
---

I recently had a pretty bad user experience when I upgraded my personal Apple
developer account into a professional one.

To sum things up, we officially created Algolia in early October and I decided
to convert my personal Apple Developer Account in order to have our
applications published under the "Algolia" name. This process is not available
online, but after a quick call, people at Apple sent me the link for the
process. It is actually pretty simple: They just need you to fill some
information about your company and to accept their EULA.

Well, actually some of this information was pretty obscure. They needed our
D-U-N-S® number... Some time ago, Apple was doing the job of checking that
your company is a real one, but they decided to delegate this job to an
external company (D&B). It looks like a good idea, doesn't it? After all this
is not their core competency and D&B may be doing a really good job for this
task...

The short answer is no, it wasn't a good idea at all! I started to check how
to get this famous D-U-N-S® and after some time to understand the antiquated
website of D&B, I finally found the contact address. One week later I finally
received our D-U-N-S®. But that's not all, Apple then asked us to wait for the
synchronization between D&B and Apple... which can take up to 14days!

Hey guys, I don't know if you realize how this is ridiculous to wait 14 days
for a simple database synchronization! You have just no idea what 14 days
means for a young startup :)

As you can imagine, I was already quite frustrated... but this was just the
beginning. After the 14 days, Apple recognized the DUNS number... but a field
was missing. They didn't have the legal type of our company. They then asked
me to contact D&B and a new nightmare started at this level: D&B was saying
that the entry was correct while Apple was asking me to contact D&B to correct
the entry! There's nothing worst than to stand be between two big companies
who pass the buck to each other.

Hopefully Apple was far smarter than D&B and they finally accepted to bypass
the missing field if I sent them directly our legal documents.

It is crucial to pay attention to all your users' problems and solve them as
soon as possible. They may sometimes look like details to you, but that's what
your customers will remember about your company. Of course, we try to apply
this lesson to ourselves. Feel free to tell us if something's going wrong!


