---
layout: post
title: 'Introducing Search Analytics: Know Your Users Better'
author:
  login: gaetan
  email: gaetan@algolia.com
  display_name: gaetan
  first_name: Gaetan
  last_name: Gachet
---

This week we have released a much requested feature by our customers:
analytics.

### The importance of analytics to search

At Algolia, our goal is to revolutionize the way people search and access
content inside the Web and mobile services. Think about Spotify, LinkedIn,
Amazon: Everyone wants to find the right songs, people and products in just a
couple keystrokes. Our challenge is to provide fast and meaningful access to
all of this content via a simple search box. In March, we answered more than
200 million user queries for our customers on every continent.

Providing the right content through the right search and browsing experience
is key. For our customers, understanding their users - what they like, what
they want and when they want it -  is just as important, if not more. This is
why we came up with this new analytics section, built on top of our API and
available on our customers' online dashboards when they log in to their
Algolia account. So what exactly do we track for you?

We describe here some of the top features that are now available to all our
users.

### Most popular queries

In this chart, we show which items were most queried. It would be useful, for
example, to a procurement department for anticipating their  most frequently-
searched products' inventory needs. And if you monetize your service through
advertising, know what people are most interested in is especially valuable.

A new analytics feature supports the most popular queries.

### Queries with no or a few results

Today, most services are simply clueless when it comes to what is missing in
their content base. How do you know that your catalogue of products fits your
users' expectations? Knowing whether or not you provide what your users need
is critical for your business.

[![Search Analytics: Track top queries](/algoliasearch-jekyll-hyde/assets/Top-search-1024x409.png)](https://blog.algolia.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Top-search.png) Algolia lets you determine which top queries have few or
nonexistent results.

### How does a query evolve over time?

Is Chanel more popular than Louis Vuitton in the morning or at night? Are
bikes more popular in June or in December? With this new feature, you can now
answer such questions for your own content by following the number of times a
specific query is typed on an hourly basis.

![Search Analytics: Track
popularity of a search query over
time](/algoliasearch-jekyll-hyde/assets/Trend Louboutin.png) Example: Search
analytics lets you track the evolution of the query "louboutin" over 24
hours.

### Which categories do people search the most?

When users type in a query, they often use categories to refine the results.
We let you know which categories were the most frequently used for refinement.
We even provide the most used combinations of categories (such as "dress" +
"blue" + "size M"). It should help you understand how your users browse your
content and has broader implications if the ergonomics of your app is
optimized.

![Search Analytics: Top categories used for filtering an
refinement](/algoliasearch-jekyll-hyde/assets/Top categories.png) Track which
combinations of categories people search for the most.

These new analytics features are included in our existing plans at no extra
cost. The number of days when our analytics tools are available vary based on
the plan you choose. We hope you will like it, and we will be more than happy
to read your feedback and feature requests!


