---
layout: post
title: How Abacus Leverages Algolia for Realtime Expense Reporting
author:
  login: kevin
  email: shipowlata@gmail.com
  display_name: kevin
  first_name: Kevin
  last_name: Granger
---

When one thinks of expense reporting, speed is far from the first descriptor
that comes to mind. Companies spend a substantial amount of time tracking
expenses, while employees linger in paperwork purgatory, wondering when they
will be reimbursed for their work-related charges. That's why Abacus has made
it their mission to simplify expense management so that it occurs in real
time. Their creative implementation of Algolia helps make it happen.

Abacus is a mobile and desktop application that allows small businesses to
track and verify expenses on the go. Employees can upload a photo of their
receipt on the mobile app, and Abacus takes care of the rest. "For each
expense, we have a lot of data. We have the person who expensed it, the amount
of the expense, the time, and where it took place. We also have a lot of
metadata. For example, if you went out to breakfast, we pull in the name of
the restaurant, the address, the URL of the merchant. There's tags and
categories and so on," explains Ted Power, Co-Founder of Abacus. "And we
wanted to make all of that searchable."

[![Abacus Algolia][1]](https://blog.algolia.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/08/Screen-Shot-2014-08-14-at-16.37.25.png)

To make all of that data accessible and interpretable for a financial manager,
Abacus turned to our API. "Algolia made it super easy for us to get faceted,
advanced search options. If you are the finance person at your company, you
can basically say 'Show me all of the expenses over $50,' or 'Show me all the
expenses that don't have a receipt.' You can look at expenses for one person
or one category, like travel. You can even pivot off of 8 of these different
things. Algolia makes it super easy to do," says Power. This accelerates the
process of expense verification and approval. "It's good search. We have tags
like 'car rental' on auto-complete, for example. That's all Algolia."

Power adds that a "great implementation experience" was especially beneficial
for the start up. "It's the kind of thing that would have taken ages to build
from scratch." Co-Founder Joshua Halickman chimed in: "Being able to get up
and off the ground really quickly was great. In general, I love the speed.
Crazy fast. Really nice."

[![Abacus Algolia][2]](https://blog.algolia.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/08/Screen-Shot-2014-08-14-at-16.38.34.png)

_Images courtesy of Abacus. LearnÂ more _[_on their
website._][3]


[1]: /algoliasearch-jekyll-hyde/assets/Screen-Shot-2014-08-14-at-16.37.25.png
[2]: /algoliasearch-jekyll-hyde/assets/Screen-Shot-2014-08-14-at-16.38.34.png
[3]: https://www.abacus.com
