---
layout: post
title: We just raised our Series A. What's next?
author:
  login: nicolas
  email: nicolas@algolia.com
  display_name: nicolas
  first_name: Nicolas
  last_name: Dessaigne
---

You may have heard last week in the [press](https://www.algolia.com/press),
Algolia has just raised an $18.3M Series A round of financing led by Accel
Partners! Philippe Botteri from Accel is joining our board and we can't wait
to benefit from his experience! We are also excited to welcome Lead Edge
Capital and to have received the trust of industry pioneers such as Ilya
Sukhar of Parse, Solomon Hykes of Docker, Erik Swan of Splunk, and Kevin Rose
of Digg.

This funding represents a major milestone for Algolia. Thanks to the
commitment of our customers our growth last year enabled us to demonstrate a
strong product market fit. We are proud to count many of you as our customers
who have seen in our offer a way to deliver a better search experience,
improving their end-users' engagement.

We want to change the way people interact with information. We don't want
people to "search" in the traditional type-keyword/hit-enter/wait-for-results
/repeat-until-found-or-abandon way; we want them to intuitively access data.
We strongly believe that search should become a frontend and UX priority.
That's why we focus so much on the two must-haves for building a seamless and
interactive experience: speed which enables updating results as-you-type, and
relevance which ensures that results are good even after only a couple of
keystrokes.

It's time for us to accelerate on that vision. With the help of this new
funding, we are going to continue investing in our core product, and in making
it available to an ever-expanding community with many new integrations. Search
is everywhere and you can count on us to come up with new creative ways to
delight your users with an outstanding experience. Stay tuned!

We will also double down on customer success, which has been so important to
our growth. Please make us accountable and let us know if there is anything we
can improve.

We have embarked on a journey to change the face of user-facing search,
everywhere. Join us, it's going to be fun!

PS: We're [hiring](https://www.algolia.com/jobs)!

